---
date: 20 Aug 2015
title: pomp version 1.1.1.1 released
layout: pomp
---

Version 1.1.1.1 has been released and is coming soon to a CRAN mirror near you.
Since version 0.65-1, there have been many changes to **pomp**, including new features, some bug fixes, and algorithmic improvements.
Some of the highlights include:
<!--more-->

#### New features

- A full-featured version of IF2, an improved iterated filtering algorithm, is now available as `mif2`.
  This allows a more general structure for the random perturbations applied to parameters and is generally much more efficient and stable than IF1.
  `mif2` should be preferred to `mif` in almost all circumstances.

- There is a new, adaptive MCMC proposal function, `mvn.rw.adaptive` that can be used in `pmcmc` and `abc`.
  This can greatly increase the efficiency of these samplers.

- By default, when `Csnippet`s are used, the source code is now stored internally to the `pomp` object.
  When a `pomp` object is used, a test is first performed to see if the needed shared-object file exists.
  If it does not, the source code is written to a file in the session's temporary directory, which is then compiled and loaded.
  This feature allows `pomp` objects to be stored and reused across **R** sessions, including parallel sessions on a cluster.

- A `pomp` object's initializer can now be specified as a `Csnippet`.

- `pmcmc` and `pfilter` now have the capability of saving filtered trajectories.
  These can be extracted using the new method `filter.traj`.
  The principal use will be in conjunction with `pmcmc`, where, upon convergence to the posterior, samples from the filtered trajectories are draws from the posterior *Prob[x[1:T] | y[1:T]]*.
  Thanks to Sebastian Funk for initiating this development.

- `partrans` and `parmat` have been jiggered to make them play better with `reshape2::melt`.

- Measles data from England and Wales, kindly provided by Ben Bolker, are now included as `ewmeas` and `ewcitmeas`.

- The new functions `bake` and `stew` faciliate storing expensive calculations for later retrieval in a transparent fashion.
  These functions have arguments that allow the control of the RNG:
  one can now set the state (and kind) of the RNG in a self-contained fashion.

- The new function `freeze` allows control of the RNG similarly.

- There is now a `coef` method for `mifList` and `mif2List` objects.

- In the `pomp` constructor, unrecognized arguments are stored internally for use with user-supplied model functions.
  Now, an informative message is generated when this happens.
  Previously, this silent behavior was a source of confusion for some users.

#### Bug fixes

- `logmeanexp` had used a delta-method estimate of the variance in `log(mean(exp(x)))` when `se = TRUE`.
  This gave misleadingly small values when the variance in `exp(x)` was large.
  The new `logmeanexp` uses a jackknife estimate of the variance.
  This is still conservative, in that it is biased upwards, but is more robust.

- The new `covmat` method, applied to `abc`, `abcList`, `pmcmc`, or `pmcmcList` objects, returns an inflated empirical covariance matrix suitable for use as input to the proposal generator `mvn.rw`.

#### Deprecated and defunct

- Some deprecated functionality has been removed:
  - The deprecated `transform.params` argument from `nlf` has been removed.
  - The deprecated `pars` and `rw.sd` arguments from `abc` and `pmcmc` have been removed.
  - The deprecated `data.array` method has been removed.

- The `seed` argument of `bsmc` and `bsmc2` has been removed.
  Its use now generates a warning, stating that it has no effect.

- The `seed` argument to `pfilter` is now deprecated and will be removed soon.
  Equivalent functionality is provided via `freeze`, `bake`, or `stew`.

- `pompBuilder`, which has not been actively maintained for some time due to the its being superseded by the `Csnippet` facility, is now no longer exported.
