---
date: 31 August 2016
layout: pomp
title: pomp version 1.8
---

**pomp** version 1.8 is now [available on CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/web/packages/pomp/index.html).
This release introduces one new feature and fixes several bugs.

### New feature

- The new `shlib.args` option to `pomp`, allows one to specify arbitrary options to be passed to the compiler when C snippets are used.

### User-visible changes

- In Sobol' sequence generation (i.e., `sobolDesign`, `profileDesign`), we now use the suggestion of Joe & Kuo (2003) to choose a better sequence start point.
- The demos have been revised to show off current best practices.

### Under the hood

- The generation of Sobol' sequences (`sobolDesign`, `profileDesign`) is now performed using the routines written in C (from the **NLopt** library) instead of the original TOMS 659 FORTRAN codes.
  The copyright notices are located in the source code.
- The stochastic simulation algorithms underlying the Gillespie and K-leap methods (`gillespie.sim`, `kleap.sim`) have been refactored in C.
  In addition, errors due to accumulation of round-off error have been repaired.
  The result will be more accurate, but somewhat slower when there are a very large number of reactions.
- The `rw.sd` facility for specifying random-walk perturbations in `mif2` has been refactored for greater stability.
- There have been many improvements to the test suite.
  The code coverage is now 100%.

### Bug fixes

- A bug in `plot` on `pomp` objects with more than 10 variables to plot has been fixed.
- A bug in `gillespie.sim` and `kleap.sim` due to accumulation of round-off error has been repaired.

Please see the package [**NEWS**](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/NEWS/) for more details.
