---
date: 14 December 2018
layout: pomp
title: pomp version 1.19 released
---

**pomp** version 1.19 is now [available on CRAN](https://cran.r-project.org/package=pomp).
Source and binaries will soon be visible on a CRAN mirror near you.

## Important note

Version 2 of **pomp**, with major improvements, is on its way.
Because it is not fully backward-compatible, **pomp** version 2 is being made available temporarily as the **pomp2** package.
**pomp2** is not available on CRAN but source and binaries can be downloaded from [the **pomp** website](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/).
See the [installation page](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/install.html) for instructions.

**pomp2** will be phased out, replaced by version 2 of **pomp**, around the middle of 2019.
At that point, **pomp** versions <2 will no longer be supported.

***It is recommended that users begin making the transition to version 2 now***.
An [upgrade guide](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/vignettes/upgrade_guide.html) is available to help you transition your codes to the new version.
In the interim period, you can have both **pomp** and **pomp2** installed on your system simultaneously.

## Release notes

**pomp** version 1.19 includes bug fixes and some feature enhancements.

### User-visible changes

- `show` and `print` methods have been made very terse:
they simply report on the class of the object in question.
To see more detailed information about a `pomp` object, use `spy`.
- New `verbose` option in `trajectory` gives diagnostic information from `deSolve` integration routines.
Of course, this is pertinent only if the model skeleton is a vectorfield.
- `coef(object) <- NULL`, where `object` is of class `pomp`, erases any parameters stored in `object`.
- The `obs` and `states` arguments of `simulate` are deprecated and will be removed in a forthcoming release.
- The old `forward` and `inverse` options for the `dir` argument of `partrans` have been dispensed with.
The much more descriptive options `toEstimationScale` and `fromEstimationScale` remain.
- The `euler.sir`, `gillespie.sir`, `blowflies`, `ricker`, `bbs`, `dacca`, and `rw2` examples are all now implemented using C snippets.
- The handling of `dprocess` has changed.
The `onestep.dens` plugin is now deprecated and will soon be removed.
`dprocess` is now specified directly using either a C snippet or an R function, in much the same way that, for example, `dmeasure` is specified.
- A bug in `pfilter` (and hence `pmcmc`) when `filter.traj=TRUE` was discovered and fixed.
In the buggy version, the filter trajectory was sampled with incorrect weights.
- A bug in the display of `istate` when `deSolve::ode` errors has been fixed.
- Timo Voipio contributed a pull request that traps the error resulting from `sannbox` being passed a `candidate.dist` that is not a function.

### API and implementation changes

- The C-level interface for `apply_probe_sims` has changed:
the new argument `rho` must be the `"package:pomp"` environment.
- New (unexported) `solibs<-` method allows developers of packages extending `pomp` to incorporate C snippets into object that contain `pomp` objects.
- New `hitch` function facilitates construction of `pomp.fun` objects from R functions, C snippets, and links to external libraries.
- Native routines needed to access `pomp.fun` objects in C are now registered for use by other packages.
- A new `pomp_defines.h` header is provided for developers of packages that depend on `pomp`.
- Internally, `rprocess` is no longer stored as an R function.
The use of plugins is now required for the implementation of the `rprocess` component.
Currently, there are five plugins available:
`onestep.sim`, `discrete.time.sim`, `euler.sim`, `gillespie.sim`, and `gillespie.hl.sim`.
- The C snippet compiling facilities have been thoroughly reworked.

See the [package NEWS](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/NEWS.html) for more details.

