---
layout: pomp
title: version 3.0.0.0 available on github
---

**pomp** version 3.0.0.0 has been released: source code and binaries are available.
This is a development release, anticipatory to the next CRAN version, which will be 3.1.

#### Important Changes

- In `mif2`, the specification of particle numbers, `Np`, has changed.
  When `Np` is supplied as a function, `Np(0)` is the requested number of particles at the beginning of the time series.
  The previous behavior was that `Np(1)` specified the requested number of particles.
  This behavior now matches that of the other particle filtering algorithms, `pfilter`, `bsmc2`, and `pmcmc`.

- As promised from version 2.4.1, the `tol` and `max.fail` arguments have been removed completely from all particle-filtering algorithms, including `pfilter`, `pmcmc`, `bsmc2`, and `mif2`.
  See the [older post](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/archive.html#version-2-5-released) for more information.

- `bsmc2` can now accept a variable number of particles, as do the other particle-filter based algorithms `pfilter`, `pmcmc`, and `mif2`.

- The internal `systematic_resample` function now allows the user to specify the number of samples desired.
  Previously, these were always equal to the number of weights supplied.

- The long-deprecated functions `onestep.dens`, `onestep.sim`, `discrete.time.sim`, `euler.sim`, `gillespie.sim`, `gillespie.hl.sim`, `conv.rec`, and `values` have been removed.
  These have been replaced as follows.

   :--------------------|:--------------------------------------------
   `onestep.dens`       |  direct specification of `dprocess` component 
   `onestep.sim`        |  `onestep`
   `discrete.time.sim`  |  `discrete_time`
   `euler.sim`          |  `euler`
   `gillespie.sim`      |  `gillespie`
   `gillespie.hl.sim`   |  `gillespie_hl`
   `conv.rec`           |  `traces`
   `values`             |  `as.data.frame` or `as(x,"data.frame")`
