---
date: 05 July 2020
layout: pomp
title: version 3.1 released
---

**pomp** version 3.1 has just been released to CRAN and is on its way to a mirror near you.
From this version **pomp** now requires at least version 4 of **R**.


## Significant user-visible changes

- In `mif2`, the specification of particle numbers, `Np`, has changed. When `Np` is supplied as a function, `Np(0)` is the requested number of particles at the beginning of the time series, i.e., time `t0`. The previous behavior was that `Np(1)` specified the requested number of particles at time `t0`. This behavior now matches that of the other particle filtering algorithms, `pfilter`, `wpfilter`, `bsmc2`, and `pmcmc`.

- `bsmc2` can now accept a variable number of particles, as do the other particle-filter based algorithms `pfilter`, `wpfilter`, `pmcmc`, and `mif2`.

- As promised from version 2.4.1, the `tol` and `max.fail` arguments have been removed completely from all particle-filtering algorithms, including `pfilter`, `pmcmc`, `bsmc2`, and `mif2`. See the [the earlier blog post](https://kingaa.github.io/pomp/archive.html#version-2-5-released) for more information.

- All instances of `cond.loglik` have been changed to `cond.logLik`, to remove a common source of typographical error.
  For the time being, the `cond.loglik` method will continue to be available, though deprecated.

- The long-deprecated functions `onestep.dens`, `onestep.sim`, `discrete.time.sim`, `euler.sim`, `gillespie.sim`, `gillespie.hl.sim`, `conv.rec`, and `values` have been removed. These have been replaced as follows:

<style type="text/css">
table {
	margin: 0 auto;
}
</style>

| Old function                    | &nbsp;&nbsp; | Replacement                                |
|:--------------------------------|:------------:|:-------------------------------------------|
| `onestep.dens`                  |              | direct specification of dprocess component |
| `onestep.sim`                   |              | `onestep`                                  |
| `discrete.time.sim`&nbsp;&nbsp; |              | `discrete_time`                            |
| `euler.sim`                     |              | `euler`                                    |
| `gillespie.sim`                 |              | `gillespie`                                |
| `gillespie.hl.sim`&nbsp;&nbsp;  |              | `gillespie_hl`                             |
| `conv.rec`                      |              | `traces`                                   |
| `values`                        |              | `as.data.frame` or `as(x,"data.frame")`    |
	
## New features

- A new sequential importance sampling algorithm has been implemented as `wpfilter`. This is a generalization of the algorithm in `pfilter` in that it tracks the weights of the particles and allows the user to customize the resampling scheme. This should be considered to be in alpha stage: changes to the interface and the underlying algorithm may come without warning. Please give it a whirl and let me know what you think via the [**pomp** issues page](https://github.com/kingaa/pomp/issues/).

- A new `saved.states` method allows one to extract the saved states from a particle filter computation.

## Under the hood

- The internal `systematic_resample` function now allows the user to specify the number of samples desired. Previously, these always had to be equal to the number of weights supplied.
